---
title: 'Virgil Crest 50 Race Recap'
date: 2024-09-18
permalink: /posts/2024/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Ultra-Running
---

It's funny how you can have so many thoughts about a race but once you go to write them down, you have no clue what to say. Virgil Crest Ultras was a race I signed up for kind of last minute (about 2 to maybe 3 weeks out of race day), but had been on my radar for about 2 months. I was looking for a race to use in my build up for Rio Del Lago in November to test my overall fitness and see if I was still on track for my goals. Virgil Crest 50 fit this aim for a few reasons. One, it's about 6 weeks out from Rio Del Lago. I felt that this gave me a good shot to push myself with ample time to recover should I blow up at the race and need more time to entirely recoup. Two, I haven't 'raced' an ultra marathon or even a marathon since I started grad school. Putting myself back into a position to race before Rio felt important to shake out the cobwebs and to (hopefully) gain some confidence. Third, and somewhat related to two, I often times feel like I don't even know what I'm doing when it comes to setting my goals and shooting for them when it comes to running. Maybe I just lack confidence, but I have no clue how hard it is to run 100 miles in 18 hours. To be honest, that goal for Rio felt fast, ambitious, but attainable (a 'goal' if you will lol). I don't know if it is going to be a stretch with my fitness to run that time or if that is well within my wheelhouse. My goals for both Rio and Virgil revolve around time, but those times historically have lead to podium finishes at both of these events. That intimidates me. I don't think of myself as a very fast runner. A quick runner, yes, but out of my element when competing with those going for podiums and wins. 
